Strimzi Performance Testing (#1)
see-quick/proposals: 068-performance-testing.md

> # Strimzi Performance Testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Introducing Performance Testing
```

> ## Motivation for Performance testing in Strimzi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Motivation
```

In the world of distributed systems, performance is not merely a feature but a fundamental aspect that dictates the
reliability, scalability, and efficiency of the system.
For Apache Kafka clusters managed by Strimzi, where data throughput, latency, and resource utilization are critical,
ensuring optimal performance is paramount.
As enterprises rely on Kafka for real-time data processing and streaming analytics, the performance of the Strimzi operators
directly influences the operational capabilities and service quality experienced by end-users.

> There are a benefits if we introduce performance testing within the Strimzi such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Benefits of performance tests:
```

1. **Uphold High Performance Standards:**
    - Performance testing ensures that Strimzi not only meets but exceeds the performance standards expected by users for managing Kafka clusters in diverse environments.
2. **Enable Continuous Improvement:**
    - With dedicated performance benchmarks, Strimzi can continually assess and enhance its components, driving innovation while maintaining performance integrity.
3. **Build Confidence Among Users:**
    - By demonstrating a commitment to performance excellence, Strimzi strengthens trust with its user community, reassuring them that their Kafka infrastructures are managed with utmost efficiency.

> Moreover, we can integrate these performance tests into our Azure pipelines, enabling automatic checks to identify

Reviewer: Point 4?

if a PR could cause a significant performance degradation, thereby ensuring every change is vetted for efficiency before being merged (future vision).

> This integration represents a proactive step towards maintaining high-performance standards and continuous improvement in Strimzi's development process.

Reviewer: This sounds like a repetition of point 2.

> There are several considerations for designing such testing, each with its own set of advantages and disadvantages, which are discussed in the subsequent section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several design considerations, each with its own set of advantages and disadvantages, which are discussed in the following sections.
```

Achieving seamless integration requires careful planning and coordination, ensuring that performance tests can be effectively
executed and monitored across different components of the Strimzi ecosystem.

#### Note on Release Lifecycle:

A dedicated repository for performance testing introduces a separate release lifecycle for the testing framework itself.
This separation offers flexibility in testing across different versions of Strimzi components but requires careful
synchronization to ensure compatibility and relevance of performance tests to the versions of Strimzi components being tested.
It also allows for independent evolution of the testing framework, accommodating new testing needs and methodologies
without being constrained by the release cycles of the Strimzi components it tests.

---

This approach may appear more effective than the initial one, yet it necessitates the creation of numerous support classes for:

1. Extracting metrics from Kubernetes Pods components
2. Monitoring the entire lifecycle
3. Documenting (i.e., reporting) the outcomes of performance tests

>     4. this could all metrics scraped during performance test
>     5. and then reporting via table of each parameter monitored during such test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. this could all metrics scraped during performance test
5. and then reporting via table of each parameter monitored during such test
```

> For instance such result from tool could look like this:

Reviewer: Which tool?

Author: Kinda confusing one....
```
For instance, such result from the performance framework could look like this:
```

Similarly, this extensibility opens up the possibility of developing a dedicated extension for Strimzi, enabling specialized
performance testing for Strimzi-managed Apache Kafka clusters.
This approach would allow for targeted load testing of Kafka operators, providing insights into how Strimzi components
behave under various load conditions, thereby ensuring that Strimzi deployments are optimized for performance and reliability.

The primary challenge is that developing such an extension requires proficiency in Go/Javascript,
which might be less familiar to our community accustomed to Java.

####  Notes on Release Cycle for Using k6:

The release cycle for incorporating k6 into Strimzi testing would bear similarities to the dedicated repository approach,
with both pros and cons.
One advantage is the potential for rapid adoption and integration of new performance testing methodologies,
given k6's established user base and continuous updates.
However, a possible downside is the need to maintain compatibility with Strimzi's evolving infrastructure,
possibly requiring frequent updates to any Strimzi-specific extensions or configurations within k6.

> ## Selected Approach/Proposal: Approach 1 - Integration within the strimzi-kafka-operator

Reviewer 2: I would keep just this selected approach and others leave to rejected alternatives
In case that others will agree on different approach, you will have it as one of the commits, so you can just easily replace it 🤷

Author: Removed

We propose integrating performance testing directly alongside existing system tests, leveraging the established infrastructure and testing utilities. 
This method ensures that performance and system tests can share resources efficiently, streamlines the development process, facilitates immediate feedback on performance impacts, and reduces overhead.

- This method integrates performance testing directly alongside existing system tests. 

> - It leverages the already established infrastructure and testing utilities, ensuring that performance and system tests can share resources such as the ResourceManager, LogCollector, and MetricsCollector.

Reviewer 2: These two things are already mentioned on the previous two lines or?

Author: Yeah, nice catch :)

- **Advantages**:
  - Streamlines the development process by using existing test infrastructure.
  - Facilitates immediate feedback on performance impacts within the same testing framework used for system tests.
  - Reduces the overhead of maintaining separate modules for system and performance tests.

### Core parts

The following strategies will be core to our implementation:

1. **JUnit5 Usage:** 
   1. Employ JUnit5 for structuring and executing performance tests. This choice allows us to benefit from JUnit5's advanced features such as dynamic tests, parameterized tests, and its powerful extension model, enhancing our test design and flexibility.
2. **Resource Management:** 

>    1. Utilize the ResourceManager from the system test module to manage the lifecycle of resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Utilize the `ResourceManager` from the system test module to manage the lifecycle of resources.
```

   2. This approach ensures efficient setup, teardown, and management of Kafka clusters, topics, and other necessary components across both performance and system tests.
3. **Metrics Collection:** 

>    1. Base our metrics collection on the system test module's MetricsCollector, with plans to possibly extend this functionality in the future from an external library like Test Frame. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   1. Base our metrics collection on the system test module's `MetricsCollector`, with plans to possibly extend this functionality in the future from an external library like Test Frame. 
```
+ link to test-frame possibly?

Author: done added.

>    2. Additionally, introduce specialized collectors such as TopicOperatorMetricsCollector to gather detailed metrics relevant to the Strimzi Topic Operator, tailoring our data gathering to the nuances of Kafka and Strimzi.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2. Additionally, introduce specialized collectors such as `TopicOperatorMetricsCollector` to gather detailed metrics relevant to the Strimzi Topic Operator, tailoring our data gathering to the nuances of Kafka and Strimzi.
```

4. **Performance Reporting:** 
   1. Develop a performance test reporting mechanism. This component will be essential for documenting and analyzing the outcomes of performance tests. 
   2. The reporter should be capable of generating detailed summaries and insights, 
   ideally supporting formats conducive to both human reading and automated parsing, such as Markdown or structured JSON.

**Including within the `systemtest` module:** Integrate performance tests to ensure they coexist seamlessly with system tests, potentially categorizing tests to maintain clarity and prevent any confusion between system and performance testing efforts (i.e., using performance profile). 

### CI: Azure Pipelines

We assume Azure machines may not suffice for all performance tests, meaning we anticipate that lower-complexity performance tests, 
not requiring as much memory/CPU, could run on such infrastructure. However, for tests needing more memory in the context of 

> performance, we prefer another approach (i.e., using a testing farm) to execute these tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
performance, we prefer another approach (i.e., using a Testing Farm) to execute these tests.
```

> ### CI: Possible integration with Testing farm 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### CI: Possible integration with Testing Farm 
```

> Special consideration will be given to the potential integration of performance tests with testing farms, utilizing 

Reviewer 2: the `testing farms` here seems weird
if you are writing about Testing Farm, then it should have the name in the text
otherwise, if you think of something else, you should name it here I think

Author: Testing farm fixed

        // 2b. Exercise: Deletion of KafkaTopics
        ResourceManager.getInstance().deleteResourcesOfType(KafkaTopic.RESOURCE_KIND);

        long deletionEndTime = System.nanoTime();
        totalDeletionTime = deletionEndTime - deletionStartTime;
        LOGGER.info("Time taken to delete {} topics: {} ms", numberOfTopics, totalDeletionTime);

        endTimeWhole = System.nanoTime();
        totalTimeWhole = endTimeWhole - startTime;

        LOGGER.info("Total time taken to create {} topics, send and receive {} messages, and delete topics: {} ms", numberOfTopics, NUMBER_OF_MESSAGES, totalTimeWhole);
    } finally {
        // 4a. teardown: Gracefully stop the topic-operator thread
        // 4b: teardown: Now, it's safe to log performance data as the collection thread has been stopped
        PerformanceReporter.logPerformanceData(
                numberOfTopics, numberOfClientInstances, NUMBER_OF_MESSAGES, createTopicsTime, totalSendAndRecvTime, 
                totalDeletionTime, totalTimeWhole, this.testStorage, ACTUAL_TIME, Environment.PERFORMANCE_DIR, 
                maxBatchSize, maxBatchLingerMs, this.topicOperatorPollingThread.getMetricsHistory()
        );
    }

> }

Reviewer 2: I think pasting the whole testcase here is not necessary
Because it's anyway similar code as we have today in STs and everything inside it is just implementation of a test case.

Author: Yeah, but this just shows what such tests would look like. It's just for illustrative purposes for a reader to have some clue about:
1. setup with also ThreadCollector ...
2. exercise 
3. verify
4. teardown - performance reporter...

I could delete it or maybe make it shorter

```

Note that this is just an one possible example. There is no need to use @ParametrizedTest.
We could also use simple @Test to edge performance cases.

### Gathered metrics

> During test execution we need to scrape metrics from the `SUT` (i.e., system under test) pods. 

Reviewer 2: You already explained what SUT is, so you don't need it here again

> Therefore, one way how to tackle such problem is that we could use a Thread, which would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, one way how to tackle such problem is that we could use a `Thread`, which would
```

        Long timeWhenMetricsWereCollected = System.nanoTime();

        Map<String, List<Double>> currentMetrics = new HashMap<>();

        // metrics
        currentMetrics.put("strimzi_alter_configs_duration_seconds_sum", this.topicOperatorMetricsCollector.getAlterConfigsDurationSecondsSum(this.selector));
        // derived Metrics
        // the total time spent on the UTO's event queue. -> (reconciliations_duration - (internal_op0_duration + internal_op1_duration,...)).
        currentMetrics.put("strimzi_total_time_spend_on_uto_event_queue_duration_seconds",
                this.calculateTotalTimeSpendOnUtoEventQueueDurationSeconds(this.selector));

        try {
            // Sleep for a predefined interval before polling again
            Thread.sleep(5000); // Poll every 5 seconds, adjust as needed
        } catch (InterruptedException e) {
            Thread.currentThread().interrupt(); // restore interrupted status
            LOGGER.error("Thread was interrupted", e);
        } catch (Exception e) {
            LOGGER.error("Exception in thread", e);
        } finally {
            LOGGER.info("Thread finishing");
        }
    }
}
```

> And in the test case we would simply interrupt such Thread to finish with scraping.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And in the test case we would simply interrupt such `Thread` to finish with scraping.
```

            ├── strimzi_describe_topics_duration_seconds_max.txt
            ├── strimzi_describe_topics_duration_seconds_sum.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_duration_seconds_max.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_duration_seconds_sum.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_failed_total.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_locked_total.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_max_batch_size.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_max_queue_size.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_successful_total.txt
            ├── strimzi_reconciliations_total.txt
            ├── strimzi_remove_finalizer_duration_seconds_max.txt
            ├── strimzi_remove_finalizer_duration_seconds_sum.txt
            ├── strimzi_resources.txt
            ├── strimzi_total_time_spend_on_uto_event_queue_duration_seconds.txt
            ├── strimzi_update_status_duration_seconds_max.txt
            ├── strimzi_update_status_duration_seconds_sum.txt
            ├── system_cpu_count.txt
            ├── system_cpu_usage.txt
            ├── system_load_average_1m.txt
            ├── system_load_average_per_core_percent.txt
            └── test-performance-metrics.txt

> ... # more dates

Reviewer 2: This can be shorter as well I think (I suppose that no-one will actually read it whole)

Author: yeah good idea

```

> where each of these files contains values, scraped by Thread in the test. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where each of these files contains values, scraped by `Thread` in the test. 
```

The decision favored a more integrated method, using the existing `systemtest` module to leverage established resources and simplify the testing process. 
The advantages of a dedicated performance module, such as organizational clarity and specialized tool integration, were weighed against the benefits of integration within the existing framework.
2. **Creating a Dedicated Repository for Performance Testing**:
While offering flexibility and the potential for broader ecosystem testing, this approach requires significant additional 
development and maintenance efforts. The need to recreate foundational components and ensure their integration with each 
Strimzi project adds complexity and resource demands.
3. **Adoption of external performnace tools (e.g., Grafana k6)**:
Despite its powerful features and extensibility, this option introduces a steep learning curve due to the requirement for proficiency in Go/Javascript, 
which may not align with the skill set of the existing Strimzi community. 
Additionally, it necessitates the development and maintenance of Strimzi-specific extensions, complicating the testing process.

## Conclusion

> Integrating performance testing within the strimzi-kafka-operator's system test module offers a streamlined, efficient approach to ensuring the performance standards of Strimzi-managed Kafka clusters are met and exceeded. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Integrating performance testing within the `strimzi-kafka-operator`'s system test module offers a streamlined, efficient approach to ensuring the performance standards of Strimzi-managed Kafka clusters are met and exceeded. 
```

#  Introducing Performance Testing

## Motivation

In the world of distributed systems, performance is not merely a feature but a fundamental aspect that dictates the

> reliability, scalability, and efficiency of the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the world of distributed systems, performance is one of the most important non-functional requirements, which has an impact on system design, reliability, scalability, and efficiency.
```

For Apache Kafka clusters managed by Strimzi, where data throughput, latency, and resource utilization are critical,

> ensuring optimal performance is paramount.

Reviewer: In general, you should use one line for each phrase, as this seems to be the convention for proposals. I'm leaving this comment here, but it applies to the entire proposal.

As enterprises rely on Kafka for real-time data processing and streaming analytics, the performance of the Strimzi operators
directly influences the operational capabilities and service quality experienced by end-users.

Benefits of performance tests:
1. **Uphold High Performance Standards:**
    - Performance testing ensures that Strimzi not only meets but exceeds the performance standards expected by users for managing Kafka clusters in diverse environments.
2. **Enable Continuous Improvement:**
    - With dedicated performance benchmarks, Strimzi can continually assess and enhance its components, driving innovation while maintaining performance integrity.
3. **Build Confidence Among Users:**
    - By demonstrating a commitment to performance excellence, Strimzi strengthens trust with its user community, reassuring them that their Kafka infrastructures are managed with utmost efficiency.
4. **Performance checks (future vision):** 

>     - Moreover, we can integrate these performance tests into our Azure pipelines, enabling automatic checks to identify if a PR could cause a significant performance degradation, thereby ensuring every change is vetted for efficiency before being merged.

Reviewer: I would leave the CI pipeline out of the motivation section, as the benefits can be leveraged even without a CI pipeline, although less efficiently. That said you should mention it later in the implementation approach.

There are several design considerations, each with its own set of advantages and disadvantages, which are discussed in the following sections.

## Implementation Approaches

I suggest a few possible methods for integrating performance testing into Strimzi, each characterized by its unique benefits and drawbacks.
Our decision on which path to follow should align with our specific requirements and goals.

### Approach 1: Integration within the strimzi-kafka-operator STs Module

This method involves incorporating performance testing directly into the existing system test module of our strimzi-kafka-operator repository.
It's a relatively straightforward strategy, leveraging the wealth of methods, resources, and components already available
within the repository, such as ResourceManager, LogCollector, and MetricsCollector.

> This integration significantly lowers the complexity and duplication of effort compared to setting up a separate dedicated repository for performance tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach significantly lowers the complexity and avoids code duplication compared to setting up a separate dedicated repository for performance tests.
```

> One of the drawbacks that we would need to add a new classes like PerformanceReporting and tools for generating Markdown documents, among others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the drawbacks is that we would need to add a new classes like PerformanceReporting and tools for generating Markdown documents, among others.
```

This approach would allow for targeted load testing of Kafka operators, providing insights into how Strimzi components
behave under various load conditions, thereby ensuring that Strimzi deployments are optimized for performance and reliability.

The primary challenge is that developing such an extension requires proficiency in Go/Javascript,
which might be less familiar to our community accustomed to Java.

####  Notes on Release Cycle for Using k6:

The release cycle for incorporating k6 into Strimzi testing would bear similarities to the dedicated repository approach,
with both pros and cons.
One advantage is the potential for rapid adoption and integration of new performance testing methodologies,
given k6's established user base and continuous updates.
However, a possible downside is the need to maintain compatibility with Strimzi's evolving infrastructure,
possibly requiring frequent updates to any Strimzi-specific extensions or configurations within k6.

## Selected Approach/Proposal: Approach 1 - Integration within the strimzi-kafka-operator

Within this framework, we propose two separate pathways to achieve our performance testing integration, 

> each with its unique set of advantages:

Reviewer: Which path do you propose to take?

Author: integrate it directly to `systemtest` module and the let's see what others think

### CI: Possible integration with Testing farm 

Special consideration will be given to the potential integration of performance tests with testing farms, utilizing 
higher-capacity machines than those available in Azure, to ensure comprehensive performance evaluation. 
This future integration into our Continuous Integration (CI) pipeline will help detect any significant performance 
degradations introduced by new changes, safeguarding the efficiency and reliability of Strimzi-managed Kafka clusters.

We could basically automate this in our PRs or by manual trigger as first try:
```bash
/packit test --labels=performance
```

So, as first step we could add this manual trigger and if we would see that such job would be stable
and would not cause any race conditions or false alarms we could include this in our PR as form of performance check.

## Implementation details

As mentioned above we will have an set of test cases, which could be run by specification of the concrete test profile.
Execution will be handled by JUnit5 identically as we are using it in `systemtests` module.

### Test case example

As an illustrative example, we can do the following:

> 1. create an set of possible configuration for SUT. 

Reviewer: I know what this acronym means, but some reader may not be familiar.

                            .endTopicOperatorContainer()
                        .endTemplate()
                    .endEntityOperator()
                .endSpec()
                .build(),
                ScraperTemplates.scraperPod(testStorage.getNamespaceName(), testStorage.getScraperName()).build());

        // 1b. setup phase: Create a Thread for scraping metrics
        this.topicOperatorCollector = new TopicOperatorMetricsCollector.Builder()
                .withScraperPodName(this.testStorage.getScraperPodName())
                .withNamespaceName(this.testStorage.getNamespaceName())
                .withComponentType(ComponentType.TopicOperator)
                .withComponentName(this.testStorage.getClusterName())
                .build();

        this.topicOperatorPollingThread = new TopicOperatorPollingThread(this.topicOperatorCollector, "strimzi.io/cluster=" + this.testStorage.getClusterName());
        this.daemonThread = new Thread(this.topicOperatorPollingThread);
        this.daemonThread.setDaemon(true); // Set as daemon so it doesn't prevent JVM shutdown
        this.daemonThread.start();

        // 2a. Exercise: Creation of KafkaTopics

>         startTime = System.currentTimeMillis();

Reviewer: Let's use nanoTime, that is not subject to clock drifts.
